Update local relay and parachain tutorials (#1140)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs: content/md/en/docs/tutorials/connect-other-chains/local-relay.md

  - relay chain
  - parachain
  - parathread
  - paraID
  - rococo
  - xcm
  - xcmp
  - collator
  - testnet
  - local
---

In this tutorial, you will configure a local relay chain and connect a parachain template for use in a local testing environment.

## Before you begin

Before you begin, verify the following:

- You have configured your environment for Substrate development by installing [Rust and the Rust toolchain](/main-docs/install/).

- You have completed [Build a local blockchain](/tutorials/get-started/build-local-blockchain/) tutorial previously.

- You understand how to generated chain specifications for a private network of trusted validators as described in the [Add trusted nodes](/tutorials/get-started/trusted-network/) tutorial .

- You are generally familiar with [architecture of Polkadot](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-architecture) and [parachains](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-parachains).

## Tutorial objectives

By completing this tutorial, you will accomplish the following objectives:

- Identify software requirements.
- Set up your parachain build environment.
- Prepare a relay chain specification.
- Start a relay chain locally.

> ## Matching versions are critical

Reviewer: I think you should remove this heading and move the content under Before you begin. That's the point of the section.

Author: I intend to reference this in other places, and the header provides a direct link. It also is of such importance I feel it motivates a section.

Be sure to use the corresponding version of Polkadot with any other software when working on _any_ examples throughout the Substrate documentation.
This also applies when in production: running a parachain _requires_ that you follow relay chain upgrades!
Falling behind is very likely to have your network _stop producing blocks_!

### Documentation examples versioning

**All tutorials in the docs** have been tested to work with:

- [Polkadot `v0.9.24`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot/tree/release-v0.9.24)
- [Substrate Parachain Template `polkadot-v0.9.24`](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template/tree/polkadot-v0.9.24)
- [Polkadot-JS Apps `v0.116.2-34 `](https://github.com/polkadot-js/apps/commit/151c4cd75b6eb68ac275d90fd17f98b28b6e57a7).
  It is generally expected that the [hosted Polkadot-JS Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=ws%3A%2F%2F127.0.0.1%3A9944#/explorer) should work.
  If you have issues, build and run this UI yourself at this tagged version/commit.

## Build the relay chain node

<!-- TODO NEW CONTENT docker and using prebuilt bins suggested https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs/issues/1073 -->

> A slightly modified version of Polkadot's built in `rococo-local` network configuration will serve as our relay chain. So clone the Polkadot repository and build the node:

Author: These are outline implicitly in the trusted network tutorial. It is out of scope of this tutorial to explain how these are arrived at.

```bash
# Clone the Polkadot Repository, with correct version
git clone --depth 1 --branch release-v0.9.24 https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot.git

# Switch into the Polkadot directory
cd polkadot

# Build the relay chain Node
cargo b -r
```

**After you start the compilation, it will take a while (commonly 15 to 60 minuets) to complete.**

> While waiting, perhaps reviewing how to [create your own chain spec](/tutorials/get-started/trusted-network/#create-a-custom-chain-specification) would be in order, as it's something you may with to do latter on here.

Author: _why not?_

```bash
# Check if the help page prints to ensure the node is built correctly
./target/release/polkadot --help
```

If the help page is printed, you have succeeded in building a Polkadot node.

## Relay chain specification

> You will need a [chain specification](/main-docs/build/chain-spec/)) for your relay chain network.

Author: `before you begin explicitly states you should have exposure to the why and how of these already

For example, if you want to connect two parachains with a single collator, run three or more relay chain validator nodes.

### Pre-configured chain spec files

We have included a two-validator relay chain with Alice and Bob as authorities chan spec file in this tutorial that you can use without modification for a local test network of a single parachain.
This is useful for registering a **single** parachain:

- [_Plain_ `rococo-local` **relay** chain spec](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs/blob/main-md/static/assets/tutorials/cumulus/chain-specs/rococo-custom-2-plain.json)
- [_Raw_ `rococo-local` **relay** chain spec](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs/blob/main-md/static/assets/tutorials/cumulus/chain-specs/rococo-custom-2-raw.json)

Plain chain spec files are in a more human readable and modifiable format for your inspection.
You will need to convert it to a SCALE encoded **raw** chain spec to use when starting your nodes.
Jump to the [raw chainspec generation](/tutorials/connect-other-chains/connect-parachain/#configure-a-parachain-for-a-specific-relay-chain-and-para-id) section to see how to do that.

> The above raw chain specs were created according to the steps in the [create your own chain spec](/tutorials/get-started/trusted-network/#create-a-custom-chain-specification) section.

Author: This is what you ask for above, on creation of chain specs.

```

The port (`port`) and websocket port (`ws-port`) specified here are the defaults and thus those flags can be omitted.
However we choose to leave them in to enforce the habit of checking their values.
Once this node is launched, no other nodes on the same local machine can use these ports.

When the node starts you will see several log messages. **Take note of the node's Peer ID** in the logs.
We will need it when connecting other nodes to it.
It will look something like this:

```bash
🏷 Local node identity is: 12D3KooWGjsmVmZCM1jPtVNp6hRbbkGBK3LADYNniJAKJ19NUYiq
```

### Start the `bob` validator

```bash
./target/release/polkadot \
--bob \
--validator \
--base-path /tmp/relay-bob \
--chain <path to spec json> \
--bootnodes /ip4/<Alice IP>/tcp/30333/p2p/<Alice Peer ID> \
--port 30334 \
--ws-port 9945
```

Bob's command is perfectly analogous to Alice's.
It differs from Alice's one by his own base path, his own validator key (`--bob`), and his own ports.
Finally he adds a `--bootnodes` flag.
This flag is not strictly necessary if you are running the entire network on a single local machine, but it is necessary when operating over the network.

<!-- TODO NAV.YAML -->

> <!-- add these back -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: This page is not included yet in the Nav and thus not ready to be uncommented. Once readythis section can  go live. Not till then.

> <!-- ## Custom relay chain specifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Optionally, explore the [how-to guide on configuring a custom chain spec](/reference/how-to-guides/basics/customize-a-chain-specification) for instructions to tweak the provided [plain chain spec](/assets/tutorials/cumulus/chain-spec/rococo-custom-2-plain.json) for addition of more validators without modification of Polkadot's source code.

> For this tutorial, your final chain spec filename **must** start with `rococo` or the node will not know what runtime logic to include. -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, your final chain spec filename **must** start with `rococo` or the node will not know what runtime logic to include. 
```

## Further resources

> Manually building and configuring a relay chain is a great exercise, but once you have done this a few times it is likely that you would want to automate this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manually building and configuring a relay chain is a great exercise.
However, after you have done it a few times, you might want to automate the process.
```

There are many ways to go about this, here are a few for reference:

<!-- TODO: add details about these in HTG pages and link here in stead on these https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs/issues/1098 -->

> - [`parachain-launch`](https://github.com/open-web3-stack/parachain-launch) - A script that generates a docker compose file allowing you to launch a testnet of multiple blockchain nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`parachain-launch`](https://github.com/open-web3-stack/parachain-launch) is a script that generates a docker compose file allowing you to launch a testnet of multiple blockchain nodes.
```

> - [`zombienet`](https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet) - A featureful CLI tool to easily spawn ephemeral Polkadot/Substrate networks and perform tests against them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`zombienet`](https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet) is a CLI tool that enables you to spawn ephemeral Polkadot/Substrate networks and perform tests against them.
```
